# image-quantization (https://github.com/igor-bezkrovny/image-quantization)

The MIT License (MIT)

Copyright (c) 2015 Igor Bezkrovny

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN
THE SOFTWARE.

# http://members.ozemail.com.au/~dekker/NEUQUANT.HTML

NeuQuant Neural-Net Quantization Algorithm
------------------------------------------

Copyright (c) 1994 Anthony Dekker

NEUQUANT Neural-Net quantization algorithm by Anthony Dekker, 1994. See
"Kohonen neural networks for optimal colour quantization" in "Network:
Computation in Neural Systems" Vol. 5 (1994) pp 351-367. for a discussion of
the algorithm.

Any party obtaining a copy of these files from the author, directly or
indirectly, is granted, free of charge, a full and unrestricted irrevocable,
world-wide, paid up, royalty-free, nonexclusive right and license to deal in
this software and documentation files (the "Software"), including without
limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute,
sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons who
receive copies from any such party to do so, with the only requirement being
that this copyright notice remain intact.

# https://github.com/leeoniya/RgbQuant.js

Copyright (c) 2015, Leon Sorokin
All rights reserved. (MIT Licensed)
